doc/asciidoc/single-shortest-path.adoc, before:

= Single Source Shortest Path

// tag::introduction[]
The _Single Source Shortest Path_ (SSSP) algorithm calculates the shortest (weighted) path between a pair of nodes.
Dijkstra's algorithm is the most well known one in this category.
SSSP is a real time graph algorithm and can be used as part of the normal user flow in a web or mobile application.
// end::introduction[]

== History, Explanation

// tag::explanation[]
Path finding has a long history and is considered to be one of the classical graph problems - it has been researched as far back as the 19th century.
It gained prominence in the early 1950s in the context of ‘alternate routing’
i.e. finding a second shortest route if the shortest route is blocked.

Dijkstra came up with his algorithm in 1956 while trying to come up with something to show off the new ARMAC computers.
He needed to find a problem and solution that people not familiar with computing would be able to understand and designed what is now known as Dijkstra's algorithm.
He later implemented it for a slightly simplified transportation map of 64 cities in the Netherlands.
// end::explanation[]

== When to use it / use-cases

// tag::use-case[]
* Finding directions between physical locations.
This is the most common usage, and web mapping tools such as MapQuest and Google Maps use the shortest path algorithm or a variant of it to provide driving directions.

* Social networks can use the algorithm to find the degrees of separation between people.
For example, when you view someone's profile on LinkedIn it will indicate how many people separate you in the connections graph as well as listing your mutual connections.

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Shortest_Path_First[Open Shortest Path First^] is a routing protocol for IP networks.
It uses Dijkstra's algorithm to help detect changes in topology, such as link failures, and https://routing-bits.com/2009/08/06/ospf-convergence/[come up with a new routing structure in seconds^].

// end::use-case[]

== Constraints / when not to use it

// tag::constraint[]
Dijkstra does not support negative weights.
The algorithm assumes that adding a relationship to a path can never make a path shorter - an invariant that would be violated with negative weights.
// end::constraint[]

== Algorithm explanation on simple sample graph

image::sssp.png[]

.Create sample graph
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=create-sample-graph]
----

=== Dijkstra single source shortest path algorithm


.Running algorithm and streaming results
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=single-pair-stream-sample-graph]                
----

.Running algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=single-pair-write-sample-graph]  
----

// tag::single-pair-stream-sample-graph-result[]
.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
| name | cost
| A | 0
| D | 50
| E | 80
| F | 100
|===

// end::single-pair-stream-sample-graph-result[]

// tag::single-pair-stream-sample-graph-explanation[]
The quickest route takes us from "A" to "F" via "D" and "E" at a total cost of 100.
We first go by rail from "A" to "D" at a cost of 50, from "D" to "E" by road for an additional 30, and finally from "E" to "F" by rail for an additional 20.
// end::single-pair-stream-sample-graph-explanation[]

=== Delta stepping algorithm


.Running algorithm and streaming results
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=delta-stream-sample-graph] 
----

.Running algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=delta-write-sample-graph] 
----

== Example Usage

== Syntax

.Running algorithm and writing back results
[source,cypher]
----
CALL algo.shortestPath(startNode:Node, endNode:Node, weightProperty:String
{nodeQuery:'labelName', relationshipQuery:'relationshipName', defaultValue:1.0,write:'true',writeProperty:'sssp',direction:'OUTGOING'})
YIELD nodeCount, totalCost, loadMillis, evalMillis, writeMillis

----

.Parameters
[opts="header",cols="1,1,1,1,4"]
|===
| name | type | default | optional | description
| startNode  | node | null | no | start node
| endNode | node | null | no | end node
| weightProperty | string | null | yes | property name that contains weight, if null treats the graph as unweighted. Must be numeric.
| defaultValue | float | null | yes | default value of the weight in case it is missing or invalid
| write | boolean | true | yes | if result should be written back as node property
| writeProperty | string | 'sssp' | yes | property name written back to the node sequence of the node in the path
| nodeQuery | string | null | yes | label to load from the graph, if null load all nodes
| relationshipQuery | string | null | yes | relationship-type to load from the graph, if null load all nodes
| direction | string | outgoing | yes | relationship direction to load from the graph, if 'both' treats the relationships as undirected
|===

.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1,6"]
|===
| name | type | description
| nodeCount | int | number of nodes considered
| totalCost | float | sum of all weights along the path
| loadMillis | int | milliseconds for loading data
| evalMillis | int | milliseconds for running the algorithm
| writeMillis | int | milliseconds for writing result data back
|===


.Running algorithm and streaming results
[source,cypher]
----
CALL algo.shortestPath.stream(startNode:Node, endNode:Node, weightProperty:String
{nodeQuery:'labelName', relationshipQuery:'relationshipName', defaultValue:1.0, direction:'OUTGOING'})
 YIELD nodeId, cost
----

.Parameters
[opts="header",cols="1,1,1,1,4"]
|===
| name | type | default | optional | description
| startNode  | node | null | no | start node
| endNode | node | null | no | end node
| weightProperty | string | null | yes | property name that contains weight, if null treats the graph as unweighted. Must be numeric.
| nodeQuery | string | null | yes | label to load from the graph, if null load all nodes
| relationshipQuery | string | null | yes | relationship-type to load from the graph, if null load all nodes
| defaultValue | float | null | yes | default value of the weight in case it is missing or invalid
| direction | string | outgoing | yes | relationship direction to load from the graph, if 'both' treats the relationships as undirected
|===

.Results
[opts="headers"]
|===
| name | type | description
| nodeId | int | node id
| cost | int | cost it takes to get from start node to specific node 
|===

== Versions 

We support the following versions of the shortest path algorithms:

* [x] directed, unweighted:  

** direction: 'OUTGOING' or INCOMING, weightProperty: null

* [x] directed, weighted 

** direction: 'OUTGOING' or INCOMING, weightProperty: 'cost'

* [x] undirected, unweighted

** direction: 'BOTH', weightProperty: null

* [x] undirected, weighted 

** direction: 'BOTH', weightProperty: 'cost'

== Implementations

`algo.shortestPath`

- specify start and end node, find the shortest path between them
- Dijkstra single source shortest path algorithm
- there may be more then one shortest path, algo returns only one
- if initialized with an non-existing weight-property it will treat the graph as unweighted

`algo.shortestPath.deltaStepping`

- specify start node, find the shortest paths to all other nodes
- parallel non-negative single source shortest path algorithm for weighted graphs
- It can be tweaked using the delta-parameter which controls the grade of concurrency.
- if initialized with an non-existing weight-property it will treat the graph as unweighted
 
`algo.shortestPaths` 

- specify start node, find the shortest paths to all other nodes
- Dijkstra single source shortest path algorithm
- if initialized with an non-existing weight-property it will treat the graph as unweighted

== References

// tag::references[]
* [1] http://onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/hrbbulletin/61/61-003.pdf[Effect of travel time and distance on freeway usage^]

* http://www.math.uiuc.edu/documenta/vol-ismp/32_schrijver-alexander-sp.pdf

* http://www.math.ias.edu/~pooyahat/Dijkstra.pdf

* https://arxiv.org/pdf/1604.02113v1.pdf

* https://www.cc.gatech.edu/~bader/papers/ShortestPaths-ALENEX2007.pdf
// end::references[]


ifdef::implementation[]
// tag::implementation[]

== Implementation Details

:leveloffset: +1
// copied from: https://github.com/neo4j-contrib/neo4j-graph-algorithms/issues/80

A _Single Source Shortest Path_ algorithms calculates a path between a pair of nodes whose summed weights are minimal. A common algorithm used is Dijkstra. _All Pairs Shortest Path_ on the other hand calculates a shortest path forest containing all paths between the nodes in the graph. An algorithm to solve this is Floyd Warshall or Parallel Johnson's algorithm. 

## Progress

- [x] single threaded implementation
- [x] tests
- [x] simple benchmark 
- [x] implement procedure
- [ ] benchmark on bigger graphs
- [ ] parallelization
- [ ] evaluation

## Requirements

`(Outgoing)RelationshipIterator` & `Weights`

## Data structured involved

- An int-based Fibonacci Heap which implements an efficient priority queue. 
- Different Container for Costs / visited state / paths

## ToDo

### benchmark

Implement benchmark on big graph

### parallelization

Parallizing _All Pairs Shortest Path_ might be easy using Dijkstra on each thread for a different node. An easy approach for _Single Source SP_ may use two threads. One starting at the start-node, one at the end-node. The first wins. [More](https://www.cs.rice.edu/~vs3/comp422/lecture-notes/comp422-lec24-s08-v2.pdf)

### evaluation

- Performance tests on different dataset sizes / level of concurrency

== Details


=== algo.shortestPath

- Dijkstra single source shortest path algorithm
- The algorithm computes a shortest path on weighted graphs
 between a given start and target-NodeId. It returns result tuples of [nodeId, distance] of each node
 in the path
- there may be more then one shortest path, algo returns only one
- if initialized with an not-existing weight-property and a defaultWeight of 1.0 the resulting path is minimal in
 terms of count of nodes in the path.
 
 
=== algo.shortestPaths

- Dijkstra single source shortest path algorithm
- returns minimum distance to *all other nodes*
- if initialized with an not-existing weight-property and a defaultWeight of 1.0 the resulting path is minimal in terms of count of nodes in the path.


=== algo.shortestPath.deltaStepping

TODO naming!?
- parallel non-negative single source shortest path algorithm for weighted graphs
- It can be tweaked using the delta-parameter which controls the grade of concurrency.
- returns minimum distance to *all other nodes*
- if initialized with an non-existing weight-property and a defaultWeight of 1.0 its result can be interpreted as
 the number of nodes to reach the target

// end::implementation[]
endif::implementation[]

Commit message:

Add sssp cypher loading section

doc/asciidoc/single-shortest-path.adoc, after:

= Single Source Shortest Path

// tag::introduction[]
The _Single Source Shortest Path_ (SSSP) algorithm calculates the shortest (weighted) path between a pair of nodes.
Dijkstra's algorithm is the most well known one in this category.
SSSP is a real time graph algorithm and can be used as part of the normal user flow in a web or mobile application.
// end::introduction[]

== History, Explanation

// tag::explanation[]
Path finding has a long history and is considered to be one of the classical graph problems - it has been researched as far back as the 19th century.
It gained prominence in the early 1950s in the context of ‘alternate routing’
i.e. finding a second shortest route if the shortest route is blocked.

Dijkstra came up with his algorithm in 1956 while trying to come up with something to show off the new ARMAC computers.
He needed to find a problem and solution that people not familiar with computing would be able to understand and designed what is now known as Dijkstra's algorithm.
He later implemented it for a slightly simplified transportation map of 64 cities in the Netherlands.
// end::explanation[]

== When to use it / use-cases

// tag::use-case[]
* Finding directions between physical locations.
This is the most common usage, and web mapping tools such as MapQuest and Google Maps use the shortest path algorithm or a variant of it to provide driving directions.

* Social networks can use the algorithm to find the degrees of separation between people.
For example, when you view someone's profile on LinkedIn it will indicate how many people separate you in the connections graph as well as listing your mutual connections.

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Shortest_Path_First[Open Shortest Path First^] is a routing protocol for IP networks.
It uses Dijkstra's algorithm to help detect changes in topology, such as link failures, and https://routing-bits.com/2009/08/06/ospf-convergence/[come up with a new routing structure in seconds^].

// end::use-case[]

== Constraints / when not to use it

// tag::constraint[]
Dijkstra does not support negative weights.
The algorithm assumes that adding a relationship to a path can never make a path shorter - an invariant that would be violated with negative weights.
// end::constraint[]

== Algorithm explanation on simple sample graph

image::sssp.png[]

.Create sample graph
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=create-sample-graph]
----

=== Dijkstra single source shortest path algorithm


.Running algorithm and streaming results
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=single-pair-stream-sample-graph]                
----

.Running algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=single-pair-write-sample-graph]  
----

// tag::single-pair-stream-sample-graph-result[]
.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
| name | cost
| A | 0
| D | 50
| E | 80
| F | 100
|===

// end::single-pair-stream-sample-graph-result[]

// tag::single-pair-stream-sample-graph-explanation[]
The quickest route takes us from "A" to "F" via "D" and "E" at a total cost of 100.
We first go by rail from "A" to "D" at a cost of 50, from "D" to "E" by road for an additional 30, and finally from "E" to "F" by rail for an additional 20.
// end::single-pair-stream-sample-graph-explanation[]

=== Delta stepping algorithm


.Running algorithm and streaming results
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=delta-stream-sample-graph] 
----

.Running algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=delta-write-sample-graph] 
----

== Example Usage

.Running algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (first:Compound {name:"RA14082836"}),(second:Compound {name:"RA13965160"})
CALL algo.shortestPath.stream(first, second, 'weight', { graph:'cypher',
nodeQuery:'MATCH(n:Compound) WHERE n.cMolecular_Weight >= 200 RETURN id(n) as id',
relationshipQuery:'MATCH(n:Compound)-[:Similarity]->(m:Compound) RETURN id(n) as source, id(m) as target, (n.cMolecular_Weight + m.cMolecular_Weight) / 2 as weight'
}) yield nodeId, cost
return nodeId, cost limit 10
----

== Syntax

.Running algorithm and writing back results
[source,cypher]
----
CALL algo.shortestPath(startNode:Node, endNode:Node, weightProperty:String
{nodeQuery:'labelName', relationshipQuery:'relationshipName', defaultValue:1.0,write:'true',writeProperty:'sssp',direction:'OUTGOING'})
YIELD nodeCount, totalCost, loadMillis, evalMillis, writeMillis

----

.Parameters
[opts="header",cols="1,1,1,1,4"]
|===
| name | type | default | optional | description
| startNode  | node | null | no | start node
| endNode | node | null | no | end node
| weightProperty | string | null | yes | property name that contains weight, if null treats the graph as unweighted. Must be numeric.
| defaultValue | float | null | yes | default value of the weight in case it is missing or invalid
| write | boolean | true | yes | if result should be written back as node property
| writeProperty | string | 'sssp' | yes | property name written back to the node sequence of the node in the path
| nodeQuery | string | null | yes | label to load from the graph, if null load all nodes
| relationshipQuery | string | null | yes | relationship-type to load from the graph, if null load all nodes
| direction | string | outgoing | yes | relationship direction to load from the graph, if 'both' treats the relationships as undirected
|===

.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1,6"]
|===
| name | type | description
| nodeCount | int | number of nodes considered
| totalCost | float | sum of all weights along the path
| loadMillis | int | milliseconds for loading data
| evalMillis | int | milliseconds for running the algorithm
| writeMillis | int | milliseconds for writing result data back
|===


.Running algorithm and streaming results
[source,cypher]
----
CALL algo.shortestPath.stream(startNode:Node, endNode:Node, weightProperty:String
{nodeQuery:'labelName', relationshipQuery:'relationshipName', defaultValue:1.0, direction:'OUTGOING'})
 YIELD nodeId, cost
----

.Parameters
[opts="header",cols="1,1,1,1,4"]
|===
| name | type | default | optional | description
| startNode  | node | null | no | start node
| endNode | node | null | no | end node
| weightProperty | string | null | yes | property name that contains weight, if null treats the graph as unweighted. Must be numeric.
| nodeQuery | string | null | yes | label to load from the graph, if null load all nodes
| relationshipQuery | string | null | yes | relationship-type to load from the graph, if null load all nodes
| defaultValue | float | null | yes | default value of the weight in case it is missing or invalid
| direction | string | outgoing | yes | relationship direction to load from the graph, if 'both' treats the relationships as undirected
|===

.Results
[opts="headers"]
|===
| name | type | description
| nodeId | int | node id
| cost | int | cost it takes to get from start node to specific node 
|===

== Versions 

We support the following versions of the shortest path algorithms:

* [x] directed, unweighted:  

** direction: 'OUTGOING' or INCOMING, weightProperty: null

* [x] directed, weighted 

** direction: 'OUTGOING' or INCOMING, weightProperty: 'cost'

* [x] undirected, unweighted

** direction: 'BOTH', weightProperty: null

* [x] undirected, weighted 

** direction: 'BOTH', weightProperty: 'cost'

== Cypher projection

If label and relationship-type are not selective enough to describe your subgraph to run the algorithm on, you can use Cypher statements to load or project subsets of your graph.
Can be also used to run algorithms on a virtual graph.
Set `graph:'cypher'` in the config.

[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/single-shortest-path.cypher[tag=cypher-loading]
----


== Implementations

`algo.shortestPath`

- specify start and end node, find the shortest path between them
- Dijkstra single source shortest path algorithm
- there may be more then one shortest path, algo returns only one
- if initialized with an non-existing weight-property it will treat the graph as unweighted

`algo.shortestPath.deltaStepping`

- specify start node, find the shortest paths to all other nodes
- parallel non-negative single source shortest path algorithm for weighted graphs
- It can be tweaked using the delta-parameter which controls the grade of concurrency.
- if initialized with an non-existing weight-property it will treat the graph as unweighted
 
`algo.shortestPaths` 

- specify start node, find the shortest paths to all other nodes
- Dijkstra single source shortest path algorithm
- if initialized with an non-existing weight-property it will treat the graph as unweighted

== References

// tag::references[]
* [1] http://onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/hrbbulletin/61/61-003.pdf[Effect of travel time and distance on freeway usage^]

* http://www.math.uiuc.edu/documenta/vol-ismp/32_schrijver-alexander-sp.pdf

* http://www.math.ias.edu/~pooyahat/Dijkstra.pdf

* https://arxiv.org/pdf/1604.02113v1.pdf

* https://www.cc.gatech.edu/~bader/papers/ShortestPaths-ALENEX2007.pdf
// end::references[]


ifdef::implementation[]
// tag::implementation[]

== Implementation Details

:leveloffset: +1
// copied from: https://github.com/neo4j-contrib/neo4j-graph-algorithms/issues/80

A _Single Source Shortest Path_ algorithms calculates a path between a pair of nodes whose summed weights are minimal. A common algorithm used is Dijkstra. _All Pairs Shortest Path_ on the other hand calculates a shortest path forest containing all paths between the nodes in the graph. An algorithm to solve this is Floyd Warshall or Parallel Johnson's algorithm. 

## Progress

- [x] single threaded implementation
- [x] tests
- [x] simple benchmark 
- [x] implement procedure
- [ ] benchmark on bigger graphs
- [ ] parallelization
- [ ] evaluation

## Requirements

`(Outgoing)RelationshipIterator` & `Weights`

## Data structured involved

- An int-based Fibonacci Heap which implements an efficient priority queue. 
- Different Container for Costs / visited state / paths

## ToDo

### benchmark

Implement benchmark on big graph

### parallelization

Parallizing _All Pairs Shortest Path_ might be easy using Dijkstra on each thread for a different node. An easy approach for _Single Source SP_ may use two threads. One starting at the start-node, one at the end-node. The first wins. [More](https://www.cs.rice.edu/~vs3/comp422/lecture-notes/comp422-lec24-s08-v2.pdf)

### evaluation

- Performance tests on different dataset sizes / level of concurrency

== Details


=== algo.shortestPath

- Dijkstra single source shortest path algorithm
- The algorithm computes a shortest path on weighted graphs
 between a given start and target-NodeId. It returns result tuples of [nodeId, distance] of each node
 in the path
- there may be more then one shortest path, algo returns only one
- if initialized with an not-existing weight-property and a defaultWeight of 1.0 the resulting path is minimal in
 terms of count of nodes in the path.
 
 
=== algo.shortestPaths

- Dijkstra single source shortest path algorithm
- returns minimum distance to *all other nodes*
- if initialized with an not-existing weight-property and a defaultWeight of 1.0 the resulting path is minimal in terms of count of nodes in the path.


=== algo.shortestPath.deltaStepping

TODO naming!?
- parallel non-negative single source shortest path algorithm for weighted graphs
- It can be tweaked using the delta-parameter which controls the grade of concurrency.
- returns minimum distance to *all other nodes*
- if initialized with an non-existing weight-property and a defaultWeight of 1.0 its result can be interpreted as
 the number of nodes to reach the target

// end::implementation[]
endif::implementation[]
