doc/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.adoc, before:

== TODO ==

renamed `algo.spanningTree`, old proc also available
alternative is `algo.spanningTree.minimum`

also available is the maximumSpanningTree `algo.spanningTree.maximum`


= Minimum Weight Spanning Tree

A _Minimum Weight Spanning Tree_ (MST) is a subset of the relationships of a connected, weighted undirected graph that connects all the nodes together, without any cycles and with the minimum possible total edge weight.
That is, it is a spanning tree whose sum of relationship weights is as small as possible.
Our current approach uses _Prim's Algorithm_ to calculate the MST starting at a given node.
It can be used to cluster the graph (KMeans).

== History, Explanation

In graph theory, a tree is a way of connecting all the vertices together, so that there is exactly one path from any one vertex, to any other vertex of the tree. If the graph represents a number of cities connected by roads, one could select a number of roads, so that each city can be reached from every other, but that there is no more than one way to travel from one city to another.

Most of the time, graphs are weighted; each connection between two cities has a weight: It might cost something to travel on a given road, or one connection may be longer than the other, this means it takes more time to travel on that connection. 

A minimum spanning tree is a tree. It is different from other trees in that it minimizes the total of the weights attached to the edges. Depending on what the graph looks like, there may be more than one minimum spanning tree. In a graph where all the edges have the same weight, every tree is a minimum spanning tree. If all the edges have different weights, there is exactly one minimal spanning tree.

Czech scientist Otakar Borůvka developed the first known algorithm for finding a minimum spanning tree in 1926. He wanted to solve the problem of finding an efficient coverage of Moravia with electricity. Today, this algorithm is known as Borůvka's algorithm. 

Prim's algorithm (sometimes known as the Jarník-Prim algorithm) is one of the simplest and best-known minimum spanning tree algorithms. 
It is closely analogous to Dijkstra's algorithm, the only difference being that the length of each relationship is minimized, rather than the total length of the path ending at each relationship. 
Unlike Dijkstra's, Prim's can tolerate negative-weight edges with no difficulty. It is optimal for dense graphs.

The algorithm then operates as follows: we start with a trivial tree containing only one node (and no relationship).
It does not matter which node is chosen. 
Then, we choose a minimal-weight relationship emanating from that node, adding it to our tree. 
We repeatedly choose a minimal-weight relationship that joins any node in the tree to one not in the tree, adding the new relationship and node to our tree. 
Such an relationship will always exist when the tree is incomplete because otherwise the partially built tree would be an isolated component (and yet we know that the graph consists of a single connected component.)
When there are no more nodes to add, the tree we have built is an minimum spanning tree.

== When to use it / use-cases

There are quite a few use cases for minimum spanning trees. One example would be a telecommunications company which is trying to lay out cables in new neighborhood. If it is constrained to bury the cable only along certain paths (e.g. along roads), then there would be a graph representing which points are connected by those paths. Some of those paths might be more expensive, because they are longer, or require the cable to be buried deeper; these paths would be represented by edges with larger weights. Currency is an acceptable unit for edge weight – there is no requirement for edge lengths to obey normal rules of geometry such as the triangle inequality. A spanning tree for that graph would be a subset of those paths that has no cycles but still connects to every house; there might be several spanning trees possible. A minimum spanning tree would be one with the lowest total cost, thus would represent the least expensive path for laying the cable.

There are also some indirect applications such as LDPC codes for error correction, image registration with Renyi entropy, learning salient features for real-time face verification, model locality of particle interactions in turbulent fluid flows and autoconfig protocol for Ethernet bridging to avoid cycles in a network.

== Constraints / when not to use it

There is only weighted version of MST algorithm as if your graph is unweighted, or equivalently, all relationships have the same weight, then any spanning tree is a minimum spanning tree.


== Algorithm explanation on simple sample graph

image::{img}/mst.png[]


.Create sample graph
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.cypher[tag=create-sample-graph]

----

Minimum weighted spanning tree visits all nodes that are in the same connected component as the starting node and returns a spanning tree of all nodes in the component where the total weight of the relationships is minimized.

.Running minimum spanning tree algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.cypher[tag=write-sample-minst-graph]

----

.Results

image::{img}/minst_result.png[]


Maximum weighted tree spanning algorithm is similar to the mininum one, except that it returns a spanning tree of all nodes in the component where the total weight of the relationships is maximized.


.Running maximum spanning tree algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.cypher[tag=write-sample-maxst-graph]

----


image::{img}/maxst_result.png[]

=== k-Spanning tree

Sometimes we want to limit the size of our spanning tree result as we are only interested in finding a smaller tree within our graph that does not span across all nodes. 
K-Spanning tree algorithm returns a tree with k nodes and k − 1 relationships.

In our sample graph we have 5 nodes.
When we ran MST above we got returned a 5-minimum spanning tree, that covered all five nodes.
By setting the `k=3` we define that we want to get returned a 3-minimum spanning tree that covers 3 nodes and has 2 relationships.

.Running k-minimum spanning tree algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.cypher[tag=write-sample-kminst-graph]

----

.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
| Place | partition 
| A | 1
| B | 1
| C | 1
| D | 3
| E | 4 
|===

Nodes A, B and C are the result 3-minimum spanning tree of our graph.

.Running k-maximum spanning tree algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.cypher[tag=write-sample-kmaxst-graph]

----

.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
| Place | partition 
| A | 0
| B | 1
| C | 3
| D | 3
| E | 3 
|===

Nodes C, D and E are the result 3-maximum spanning tree of our graph.

== Example Usage

== Syntax

.Running algorithm and writing back results
[source,cypher]
----
CALL algo.spanningTree(label:String, relationshipType:String, weightProperty:String, startNodeId:int, {writeProperty:String}) 
YIELD loadMillis, computeMillis, writeMillis, effectiveNodeCount
----

.Parameters
[opts="header",cols="1,1,1,1,4"]
|===
| name | type | default | optional | description
| label  | String | null | no | label to load from the graph. If null load all nodes
| relationshipType  | String | null | no | relationship-type to load from the graph. If null load all nodes
| weightProperty | string | null | no | property name that contains weight. Must be numeric.
| startNodeId | long | null | no | start node id
| write | boolean | true | yes | if result should be written back as relationships
| writeProperty | string | 'mst' | yes | relationship-type written back as result

|===

.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1,6"]
|===
| name | type | description
| effectiveNodeCount | int | number of visited nodes
| loadMillis | int | milliseconds for loading data
| computeMillis | int | milliseconds for running the algorithm
| writeMillis | int | milliseconds for writing result data back
|===


.Running k-spanning tree algorithm and writing back results
[source,cypher]
----
CALL algo.spanningTree.k*(label:String, relationshipType:String, weightProperty:String, startNodeId:int, k:int, {writeProperty:String}) 
YIELD loadMillis, computeMillis, writeMillis, effectiveNodeCount
----

.Parameters
[opts="header",cols="1,1,1,1,4"]
|===
| name | type | default | optional | description
| label  | String | null | no | label to load from the graph. If null load all nodes
| relationshipType  | String | null | no | relationship type
| weightProperty | string | null | no | property name that contains weight. Must be numeric.
| startNodeId | int | null | no | start node id
| k | int | null | no | result is a tree with k nodes and k − 1 relationships
| write | boolean | true | yes | if result should be written back as node property
| writeProperty | string | 'mst' | yes | relationship-type written back as result

|===

.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1,6"]
|===
| name | type | description
| effectiveNodeCount | int | number of visited nodes
| loadMillis | int | milliseconds for loading data
| computeMillis | int | milliseconds for running the algorithm
| writeMillis | int | milliseconds for writing result data back
|===


== Versions 

We support the following versions of the minimum weight spanning tree algorithm:

* [x] undirected, weighted 

== References

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_spanning_tree

* http://www.statisticshowto.com/minimum-spanning-tree

* http://algs4.cs.princeton.edu/43mst/

* https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~rs/AlgsDS07/14MST.pdf

* https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~wlovas/15122-r11/lectures/old/26-spanning.pdf

ifdef::implementation[]
// tag::implementation[]

== Implementation Details

:leveloffset: +1
// copied from: https://github.com/neo4j-contrib/neo4j-graph-algorithms/issues/81

A _Minimum Weight Spanning Tree_ is a acyclic undirected graph which consists of all connected nodes and whose relationship weights are minimal. It can be used to cluster the graph (KMeans). Our current approach uses _Prim's Algorithm_ to calculate the MST starting at a given node. This might not cover the whole graph. But if the nodes are connected the MST is always identical regardless at which node the execution starts.

## Progress

- [x] single threaded implementation
- [x] tests
- [x] simple benchmark 
- [x] implement procedure
- [x] benchmark on bigger graphs
- [?] parallelization
- [ ] evaluation

## Requirements

`BothRelationshipIterator` & `Weights`

## Data structured involved

- `org.neo4j.graphalgo.core.utils.container.UndirectedTree` as container for efficient splitting and iterate
- An int-based Fibonacci Heap priority queue. 
- Container for visited state 

## ToDo

### benchmark

Implement benchmark on big graph

### parallelization

### evaluation

- Performance tests on different dataset sizes / level of concurrency

// end::implementation[]
endif::implementation[]

Commit message:

Add example to find result

doc/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.adoc, after:

== TODO ==

renamed `algo.spanningTree`, old proc also available
alternative is `algo.spanningTree.minimum`

also available is the maximumSpanningTree `algo.spanningTree.maximum`


= Minimum Weight Spanning Tree

A _Minimum Weight Spanning Tree_ (MST) is a subset of the relationships of a connected, weighted undirected graph that connects all the nodes together, without any cycles and with the minimum possible total edge weight.
That is, it is a spanning tree whose sum of relationship weights is as small as possible.
Our current approach uses _Prim's Algorithm_ to calculate the MST starting at a given node.
It can be used to cluster the graph (KMeans).

== History, Explanation

In graph theory, a tree is a way of connecting all the vertices together, so that there is exactly one path from any one vertex, to any other vertex of the tree. If the graph represents a number of cities connected by roads, one could select a number of roads, so that each city can be reached from every other, but that there is no more than one way to travel from one city to another.

Most of the time, graphs are weighted; each connection between two cities has a weight: It might cost something to travel on a given road, or one connection may be longer than the other, this means it takes more time to travel on that connection. 

A minimum spanning tree is a tree. It is different from other trees in that it minimizes the total of the weights attached to the edges. Depending on what the graph looks like, there may be more than one minimum spanning tree. In a graph where all the edges have the same weight, every tree is a minimum spanning tree. If all the edges have different weights, there is exactly one minimal spanning tree.

Czech scientist Otakar Borůvka developed the first known algorithm for finding a minimum spanning tree in 1926. He wanted to solve the problem of finding an efficient coverage of Moravia with electricity. Today, this algorithm is known as Borůvka's algorithm. 

Prim's algorithm (sometimes known as the Jarník-Prim algorithm) is one of the simplest and best-known minimum spanning tree algorithms. 
It is closely analogous to Dijkstra's algorithm, the only difference being that the length of each relationship is minimized, rather than the total length of the path ending at each relationship. 
Unlike Dijkstra's, Prim's can tolerate negative-weight edges with no difficulty. It is optimal for dense graphs.

The algorithm then operates as follows: we start with a trivial tree containing only one node (and no relationship).
It does not matter which node is chosen. 
Then, we choose a minimal-weight relationship emanating from that node, adding it to our tree. 
We repeatedly choose a minimal-weight relationship that joins any node in the tree to one not in the tree, adding the new relationship and node to our tree. 
Such an relationship will always exist when the tree is incomplete because otherwise the partially built tree would be an isolated component (and yet we know that the graph consists of a single connected component.)
When there are no more nodes to add, the tree we have built is an minimum spanning tree.

== When to use it / use-cases

There are quite a few use cases for minimum spanning trees. One example would be a telecommunications company which is trying to lay out cables in new neighborhood. If it is constrained to bury the cable only along certain paths (e.g. along roads), then there would be a graph representing which points are connected by those paths. Some of those paths might be more expensive, because they are longer, or require the cable to be buried deeper; these paths would be represented by edges with larger weights. Currency is an acceptable unit for edge weight – there is no requirement for edge lengths to obey normal rules of geometry such as the triangle inequality. A spanning tree for that graph would be a subset of those paths that has no cycles but still connects to every house; there might be several spanning trees possible. A minimum spanning tree would be one with the lowest total cost, thus would represent the least expensive path for laying the cable.

There are also some indirect applications such as LDPC codes for error correction, image registration with Renyi entropy, learning salient features for real-time face verification, model locality of particle interactions in turbulent fluid flows and autoconfig protocol for Ethernet bridging to avoid cycles in a network.

== Constraints / when not to use it

There is only weighted version of MST algorithm as if your graph is unweighted, or equivalently, all relationships have the same weight, then any spanning tree is a minimum spanning tree.


== Algorithm explanation on simple sample graph

image::{img}/mst.png[]


.Create sample graph
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.cypher[tag=create-sample-graph]

----

Minimum weighted spanning tree visits all nodes that are in the same connected component as the starting node and returns a spanning tree of all nodes in the component where the total weight of the relationships is minimized.

.Running minimum spanning tree algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.cypher[tag=write-sample-minst-graph]

----

.Results

image::{img}/minst_result.png[]


Maximum weighted tree spanning algorithm is similar to the mininum one, except that it returns a spanning tree of all nodes in the component where the total weight of the relationships is maximized.


.Running maximum spanning tree algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.cypher[tag=write-sample-maxst-graph]

----


image::{img}/maxst_result.png[]

=== k-Spanning tree

Sometimes we want to limit the size of our spanning tree result as we are only interested in finding a smaller tree within our graph that does not span across all nodes. 
K-Spanning tree algorithm returns a tree with k nodes and k − 1 relationships.

In our sample graph we have 5 nodes.
When we ran MST above we got returned a 5-minimum spanning tree, that covered all five nodes.
By setting the `k=3` we define that we want to get returned a 3-minimum spanning tree that covers 3 nodes and has 2 relationships.

.Running k-minimum spanning tree algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.cypher[tag=write-sample-kminst-graph]

----

.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
| Place | partition 
| A | 1
| B | 1
| C | 1
| D | 3
| E | 4 
|===

Nodes A, B and C are the result 3-minimum spanning tree of our graph.

.Running k-maximum spanning tree algorithm and writing back results 
[source,cypher]
----
include::scripts/minimum-weight-spanning-tree.cypher[tag=write-sample-kmaxst-graph]

----

.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
| Place | partition 
| A | 0
| B | 1
| C | 3
| D | 3
| E | 3 
|===

Nodes C, D and E are the result 3-maximum spanning tree of our graph.


When we run this algorithm on a bigger graph we can use the following query to find nodes that belong to our k-spanning tree result. 

.Find nodes that belong to our k-spanning tree result.
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (n:Place)
WITH n.partition as partition, count(*) as count 
WHERE count = k
RETURN n 
----

== Example Usage

== Syntax

.Running algorithm and writing back results
[source,cypher]
----
CALL algo.spanningTree(label:String, relationshipType:String, weightProperty:String, startNodeId:int, {writeProperty:String}) 
YIELD loadMillis, computeMillis, writeMillis, effectiveNodeCount
----

.Parameters
[opts="header",cols="1,1,1,1,4"]
|===
| name | type | default | optional | description
| label  | String | null | no | label to load from the graph. If null load all nodes
| relationshipType  | String | null | no | relationship-type to load from the graph. If null load all nodes
| weightProperty | string | null | no | property name that contains weight. Must be numeric.
| startNodeId | long | null | no | start node id
| write | boolean | true | yes | if result should be written back as relationships
| writeProperty | string | 'mst' | yes | relationship-type written back as result

|===

.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1,6"]
|===
| name | type | description
| effectiveNodeCount | int | number of visited nodes
| loadMillis | int | milliseconds for loading data
| computeMillis | int | milliseconds for running the algorithm
| writeMillis | int | milliseconds for writing result data back
|===


.Running k-spanning tree algorithm and writing back results
[source,cypher]
----
CALL algo.spanningTree.k*(label:String, relationshipType:String, weightProperty:String, startNodeId:int, k:int, {writeProperty:String}) 
YIELD loadMillis, computeMillis, writeMillis, effectiveNodeCount
----

.Parameters
[opts="header",cols="1,1,1,1,4"]
|===
| name | type | default | optional | description
| label  | String | null | no | label to load from the graph. If null load all nodes
| relationshipType  | String | null | no | relationship type
| weightProperty | string | null | no | property name that contains weight. Must be numeric.
| startNodeId | int | null | no | start node id
| k | int | null | no | result is a tree with k nodes and k − 1 relationships
| write | boolean | true | yes | if result should be written back as node property
| writeProperty | string | 'mst' | yes | relationship-type written back as result

|===

.Results
[opts="header",cols="1,1,6"]
|===
| name | type | description
| effectiveNodeCount | int | number of visited nodes
| loadMillis | int | milliseconds for loading data
| computeMillis | int | milliseconds for running the algorithm
| writeMillis | int | milliseconds for writing result data back
|===


== Versions 

We support the following versions of the minimum weight spanning tree algorithm:

* [x] undirected, weighted 

== References

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_spanning_tree

* http://www.statisticshowto.com/minimum-spanning-tree

* http://algs4.cs.princeton.edu/43mst/

* https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~rs/AlgsDS07/14MST.pdf

* https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~wlovas/15122-r11/lectures/old/26-spanning.pdf

ifdef::implementation[]
// tag::implementation[]

== Implementation Details

:leveloffset: +1
// copied from: https://github.com/neo4j-contrib/neo4j-graph-algorithms/issues/81

A _Minimum Weight Spanning Tree_ is a acyclic undirected graph which consists of all connected nodes and whose relationship weights are minimal. It can be used to cluster the graph (KMeans). Our current approach uses _Prim's Algorithm_ to calculate the MST starting at a given node. This might not cover the whole graph. But if the nodes are connected the MST is always identical regardless at which node the execution starts.

## Progress

- [x] single threaded implementation
- [x] tests
- [x] simple benchmark 
- [x] implement procedure
- [x] benchmark on bigger graphs
- [?] parallelization
- [ ] evaluation

## Requirements

`BothRelationshipIterator` & `Weights`

## Data structured involved

- `org.neo4j.graphalgo.core.utils.container.UndirectedTree` as container for efficient splitting and iterate
- An int-based Fibonacci Heap priority queue. 
- Container for visited state 

## ToDo

### benchmark

Implement benchmark on big graph

### parallelization

### evaluation

- Performance tests on different dataset sizes / level of concurrency

// end::implementation[]
endif::implementation[]
